---
title: Smart Home Administration
layout: post
date: 2021-06-24
categories:
  - smart home
  - network
---

I've been working lately on chronicling my home network's journey from its
nascent beginnings as nothing more than a WiFi router, cable modem, laptops, and
smartphones. As I've been working on the more recent timeline of all of our
smart home network appliances, I stopped to think about how much time and energy
I've spent in administering them. Cumulatively, it's a lot. As recently as last
week I had to work on our home alarm's central hub not reconnecting to the
network properly after our ISP had some intermittent outages (rebooting the hub
did the trick, by the way).

It's not a big deal for me to handle all of my family's smart home needs. I've
been knee-deep in technology for over two decades. I'm comfortable with smart
thermostats, smart locks, and more. Self-administration of our smart home is
relatively interesting to me (and let's face it, I like playing with new-to-me
technologies), though it can get annoying at times when I have other things to
do, or if the problem repeats itself and doesn't self-heal. I must assume that
I'm one of the more tech-savvy smart home technology consumers, though I don't
have any numbers and data to back up that assumption. I assume in part due to
Ring doorbells - they're everywhere, and I know of many whom aren't as into
technology as I am which own these doorbells.

My natural next thought was that there are likely lots of tech-savvy Millennials
such as myself helping out their older (or otherwise less tech-savvy) family
members with things like smart home technology. In the past I've helped out
family in establishing WiFi bridges in their homes, and helping suggest
powerline adapters to extend home networks (spoiler alert - the powerline
adapter worked much better for them than the bridge, as it did for me too). It's
a pretty common pattern - the younger generations help out the older ones with
emerging technologies. But what if a family doesn't have a resident technologist
to help them out? What if there aren't any neighbors or friends who can or want
to help out?

The
[question that arose in my mind](https://twitter.com/rfpludwick/status/1407404989291532290)
was a simple one - are there any small businesses which have cropped up to
administer smart home appliances for those residents who can't or won't
self-administer? Some cursory Internet searches seem to indicate that businesses
such as these exist - I came across a
[blog post](https://www.loxone.com/enus/blog/smart-home-business/) from Loxone
where they offer guidance to those who might want to start a small business
around offering smart home solutions to residents, as well as
[another post](https://howtostartanllc.com/business-ideas/home-automation) from
TRUiC. But this doesn't really tell me how many small businesses have actually
been setup for these purposes.

Further searching, specifically in the Portland, Oregon area yielded a
[HomeAdvisor result](https://www.homeadvisor.com/tloc/Portland-OR/Home-Automation-System-Install-or-Service/)
for a single "home automation system" business which has been prescreened. There
are other searches one can run in this space for specific things like home alarm
system installers, surveillance camera installers, and more. Anecdotally,
though, most of the results I found were with electricians and others who have
electrical certifications. Since things like smart doorbells and thermostats
need to be connected to low-voltage power, these kinds of results aren't
surprising. Another conclusion I've made is that a lot of these results seem to
be closer to professional-grade systems. I didn't find many results of small
businesses who'd help residents with "consumer-grade" smart home technologies
like Ecobee thermostats and MyQ garage door openers.

I haven't really been paying a lot of attention to smart home automation
businesses, so I'm not really surprised to find that there are some results out
here for these kinds of services for residents. I'm a little surprised that
there aren't **more** results, actually. When this whole exercise began, I felt
like maybe I'd realized there was a whole market not being served. Alas, I was
not as brilliantly insightful as I thought.

I won't be paying others to administer my smart home automations though. Not
when I'm running [Home Assistant](https://www.home-assistant.io/). I won't trust
anybody else to administer **that**.
